EMBARGOED UNTIL: 1:00 a.m. (EDT) September 21, 2000

VIDEO NO.: STScI-VID00-32

MOVIES FROM HUBBLE SHOW THE CHANGING FACES OF INFANT STARS

Time-lapse movies made from a series of pictures taken by NASA's Hubble
Space Telescope are showing astronomers that young stars and their
surroundings can change dramatically in just weeks or months. As with
most children, a picture of these youngsters taken today won't look the
same as one snapped a few months from now. The movies show jets of gas
plowing into space at hundreds of thousands of miles per hour and moving
shadows billions of miles in size.

The young star systems featured in the movies, XZ Tauri and HH 30,
reside about 450 light-years from Earth in the Taurus-Auriga molecular
cloud, one of the nearest stellar nurseries to our planet. Both systems
are probably less than a million years old, making them relative
newborns, given that stars typically live for billions of years.
Hubble's Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 first observed them in 1995.
Those views were so intriguing that additional images were taken in
1998, 1999, and 2000. The pictures were then combined into movies that
document startling activity in the early stages of a star's life.

Stars form in clouds of gas and dust that collect into a swirling disk.
Outflows of gas, like the bubbles and jets seen in these images, occur
when some of the material feeding the infant star from the surrounding
disk is diverted away by the star's magnetic field and accelerated out
its magnetic poles. These outflows are often squeezed into narrow jets
that can extend many light-years away from the star. Such outflows are a
common and natural result of stellar birth.


XZ Tauri  (STScI-VID00-32a)

XZ Tauri is a young system with two stars orbiting each other. The pair
is separated by about 4 billion miles (6 billion kilometers), about the
distance from the Sun to the planet Pluto in our own solar system.
Hubble astronomers were surprised to discover a bubble of hot, glowing
gas extending nearly 60 billion miles (96 billion kilometers) from this
young star system. The bubble's temperature is over 17,500 degrees
Fahrenheit (9,700 degrees Celsius). The bubble appears much broader than
the narrow jets seen in other young stars, but it is caused by the same
process - the ejection of gas from a star. However, the Hubble images do
not show the disk that feeds the outflow process - or even which star in
the binary is the outflow source. Additional observations should help to
point this out.

The movie shows that the outer edge of the bubble moves away from the
binary system at a speed greater than 300,000 miles per hour (540,000 
kilometers per hour), which is typical for stellar jets. This rate and
the size of the bubble indicate that it is only about 30 years old, a
mere blink of an eye in the life of a star. Sideways expansion of the
bubble indicates that it has a strong internal pressure. A second bubble
appears halfway up the waist of the first, indicating that new ejections
may occur sporadically. Occasionally, bright, compact clumps of gas
appear and then disperse within the bubble.

Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the bubble is the change in its
appearance between 1995 and 1998. In the first picture, its edge and
interior appeared equally bright; in 1998, the edge became distinctly
brighter. Astronomers theorize that the gas around the bubble's edges
has cooled, allowing it to glow more strongly as hydrogen and sulfur
atoms recombine with electrons. Continued expansion of the bubble should
cause the entire structure to fade from view - until XZ Tauri sends
another eruption of hot gas into its surroundings.

Credits: John Krist (Space Telescope Science Institute), Karl
Stapelfeldt (NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory), Jeff Hester (Arizona State
University), Chris Burrows (European
Space Agency/Space Telescope Science Institute)


HH 30  (STScI-VID00-32b)

Hubble observations of HH 30 show a pair of thin jets streaming away
from the center of a dusty disk. The disk, which is over 40 billion
miles (64 billion kilometers) in diameter, is seen almost edge-on. Like
a thin, dark cloud moving in front of the Sun, the disk blocks any
direct view of its central star. All that is seen are the top and bottom
sides of the dusty disk reflecting light from the star, like the "silver
lining" of a cloud. The jets reveal the hidden star's location.
Astronomers are interested in the disk because it is probably similar to
the one from which the Sun and the planets in our solar system formed.

HH 30's disk and jet show dramatic changes in the six years covered by
the time-lapse movie. The jets are easiest to explain: as in XZ Tauri,
material is being ejected along the magnetic poles of the star at speeds
of between 200,000 and 600,000 miles per hour (320,000 and 960,000
kilometers per hour). Every few months a compact clump of gas, called a
knot, is ejected, and may eventually merge with other clumps downstream.
However, astronomers aren't sure why the knots in the upper jet are
moving only about half as fast as in the fainter, lower one.

The changes in the disk are quite peculiar: patterns of light appear to
be moving around within it. Astronomers believe this effect is similar
to distant clouds being illuminated by the beam from a lighthouse: As
the light rotates, the clouds seem to brighten and then fade. In the
case of HH 30, the lighthouse is the star and the inner part of its
disk, which throws bright rays and casts dark shadows on the outer part
of the disk. This "lighthouse" in HH 30 appears to be rotating between
once every few days and once a year. Astronomers hope more observations
will narrow down that cycle and thus show whether the light patterns are
shadows cast by material in the disk or beams of light from hot spots on
the star. 

Credits: Alan Watson (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico), 
Karl Stapelfeldt (NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory), John Krist (Space
Telescope Science Institute), and Chris Burrows (European Space Agency/
Space Telescope Science Institute)

EDITOR'S NOTE:  For additional information, please contact John Krist,
Space Telescope Science Institute, 3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD
21218, (phone) 410-338-4901, (e-mail) krist@stsci.edu or Alan Watson,
Instituto de Astronomia, UNAM, Morelia, Mexico, (phone) 52-56-234748,
(e-mail) alan@astrosmo.unam.mx or Karl Stapelfeldt, Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109, (phone)
818-354-2640, (e-mail) krs@exoplanet.jpl.nasa.gov or Jeff Hester,
Arizona State University, Physics and Astronomy Dept., Box 871504,
Tempe, AZ, (phone) 480-965-0741, (e-mail) jhester@asu.edu.

Animation and image files are available on the Internet at:
http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/pr/2000/32 and via links in
http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/latest.html
http://oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/pictures.html and
http://hubble.stsci.edu/go/news

To receive STScI press releases electronically, send an Internet
electronic mail message to public-request@stsci.edu. Leave the subject
line blank.  In the body of the message (not the subject line) type the
word "subscribe" (don't use quotes). The system will respond with a
confirmation of the subscription, and you will receive new press
releases as they are issued. Please subscribe using the email account
with which you would like to receive list messages. To unsubscribe, send
mail to public-request@stsci.edu. Leave the subject line blank. Type the
word "unsubscribe" (don't use quotes) in the body of the message. Please
unsubscribe using the email account that you used to subscribe to the
list.